Skeleton 3D Darwin MPI/OpenMP Particle-in-Cell (PIC) codes
by Viktor K. Decyk
copyright 2000-2015, regents of the university of california

This program contains sample codes for illustrating the basic structure
of a 3D Darwin MPI/OpenMP Particle-in-Cell (PIC) code, in both Fortran
and C. The codes have no diagnosics except for initial and final
energies. Their primary purpose is to provide example codes for physical
science students learning about MPI/OpenMP PIC codes.  They are also
intended as benchmark reference codes to aid in developing new codes and
in evaluating new computer architectures.  Parallel versions
of this code with the same structure for MPI only (pdpic3) and OpenMP
only (mdpic3) also exist, and can be compared to this code in order to
understand the parallel algorithms.

PIC codes are widely used in plasma physics.  They model plasmas as
particles which interact self-consistently via the electromagnetic
fields they themselves produce.  PIC codes generally have three
important procedures in the main iteration loop.  The first is the
deposit, where some particle quantity, such as a charge, is accumulated
on a grid via interpolation to produce a source density.  The second
important procedure is the field solver, which solves Maxwell’s equation
or a subset to obtain the electric and/or magnetic fields from the
source densities.  Finally, once the fields are obtained, the particle
forces are found by interpolation from the grid, and the particle
co-ordinates are updated, using Newton’s second law and the Lorentz
force.  The particle processing parts dominate over the field solving
parts in a typical PIC application. 

More details about PIC codes can be found in the texts by C. K. Birdsall
and A. B. Langdon, Plasma Physics via Computer Simulation, 1985,
R. W. Hockney and J. W. Eastwood, Computer Simulation Using Particles,
1981, and John M. Dawson, "Particle simulation of plasmas", Rev. Mod.
Phys. 55, 403 (1983).  Details about the mathematical equations and
units used in this code is given in the companion article,
"Description of Darwin Spectral Code from the UPIC Framework,"
by Viktor K. Decyk, UCLA, in the file DModels.pdf.

Details abut MPI can be found in the book by William Gropp, Ewing Lusk,
and Anthony Skjellum, Using MPI: Portable Parallel Programming with the
Message-Passing Interface, The MIT Press, 1994.  Details abut OpenMP can
be found in the book by Rohit Chandra, Leonardo Dagum, Dave Kohr, 
Dror Maydan, Jeff McDonald, and Ramesh Menon, Parallel Programming in
OpenMP, Morgan Kaufmann, 2001.

No warranty for proper operation of this software is given or implied.
Software or information may be copied, distributed, and used at own
risk; it may not be distributed without this notice included verbatim
with each file.  If use of these codes results in a publication, an
acknowledgement is requested.

The code here uses the near-field electromagnetic interaction, obtained
by solving the Darwin subset of Maxwell's equation, where the transverse
displacement current in neglected in Ampere's law.  A spectral method
using Fast Fourier Transforms (FFTs) is used to solve the scalar and
vector Poisson equations.  A real to complex FFT is used, and the data
in Fourier space is stored in a packed format, where the input and
output sizes are the same.  The boundary conditions are periodic, only
electron species are included, and linear interpolation is used.
Additional details can be found in the companion presentation,
Darwin2.pdf.

For parallelization, the code uses two levels of parallelism.  The
outermost level uses a simple 2D domain decomposition scheme, where the
field quantities (electric and magnetic fields, charge and current and
current derivative densities) are divided among the computational nodes.
The primary decomposition divides the y and z values evenly, that is,
each node has all the x values for some y and some z.  The particles are
distributed so that the y and z co-ordinates of the particles have a
value within the domain.  This simple decomposition works if the
particles are uniformly distributed in space.  Particles at the edges of
the domain may need information from the nearby domains in order to
interpolate the fields.  To avoid unnecessary communication, one extra
guard cell in y and z is added at the end of each domain that replicates
the first y and z values in the nearby domains.  After particles are
updated, some particles may move to a neighboring domain.  A particle
manager (PPPMOVE32) is responsible for moving such particles to the
appropriate domain.  The FFT is performed in 5 steps.  In going from
real space to Fourier space, the FFT is first performed in x for the y
and z values in the primary domain.  The data is then transposed to a
secondary domain decomposition, where each node has all the y values for
some x and z.  The FFT is then performed in the y direction for the x
and z values in the secondary domain.  Finally, the data is then
transposed to a tertiary domain decomposition, where each node has all
the z values for some x and y.  The FFT is then performed in the z
direction for the x and y values in the tertiary domain.  The Darwin
equations are solved using this tertiary decomposition.  There are five
main communication procedures which use MPI.  The first two add the
guard cells for the charge, current and current derivative densities,
the third copies the guard cells for the electric and magnetic fields.
The fourth is the particle manager, and the fifth transposes the data
between the primary, secondary, and tertiary decompositions using a some
to some communication pattern.  Further information about the domain
decomposition parallel algorithms used can be found in the companion
presentation Dcomp.pdf and in the article: p. c. liewer and v. k. decyk,
j. computational phys. 85, 302 (1989).

On each MPI node, a second level of parallelism is used.  The innermost
level uses a tiling (or blocking) technique.  Space is divided into
small 3D tiles (with typically 8x8x8 grid points in a tile), and
particles are organized so that their co-ordinates in x, y, and z lie
within the same tile and are stored together in memory.  Assigning
different threads to different tiles avoids data collisions (where 2
threads try to write to the same memory location at the same time).  The
size of the tiles should be smaller than the L1 cache and the number of
tiles should be equal to or greater than the number of processing cores.
There are 5 major procedures which make use of the tiled data structure,
the charge, current, and time derivative of the current deposits, the
particle push, and the particle reordering.  In the deposit procedures,
each thread first deposits to a small local density array the size of a
tile plus guard cells.  After all the particles in a tile have been
processed the small density array is added to the global density arrays.
The particle push is similar, where each thread first copies the global
field array to small local field arrays which are then used for field
interpolation.  The particle reordering step is divided into two
procedures.  The first procedure (PPORDERF32LA) moves particles which
are leaving a tile into an ordered particle buffer.  In addition, those
particles which are leaving the MPI node are copied to one of two MPI
send buffers.  The MPI particle manager (PPPMOVE32) then sends and
receives the particle buffers.  The second procedure (PPORDERF32LB) then
copies the incoming particles, either from the ordered particle buffer
or from the MPI receive buffers, and inserts the particles into the
appropriate location in the particle array.  Further information about
this tiling parallel algorithm used can be found in the article:
V. K. Decyk and T. V. Singh, "Particle-in-Cell Algorithms for Emerging
Computer Architectures," Computer Physics Communications, 185, 708,
2014, available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2013.10.013.  Further
information about the hybrid domain decomposition/tiling scheme can be
found in the companion presentation MPI-OpenMP-PIC.pdf.

The default particle push and current deposit procedures calculate the
list of particles leaving the tiles.  This was done because the code was
faster.  There are, however, versions of the push procedure
(PPGBPPUSH32L) which does not calculate the list, and is easier to
understand.  This version of the push requires a different reordering
procedure (PPPORDER32LA) which calculates the list.

Particles are initialized with a uniform distribution in space and a
gaussian distribution in velocity space.  This describes a plasma in
thermal equilibrium.  The inner loop contains a current, a current
derivative, and charge deposit, add guard cell procedures, a vector and
scalar FFT, transverse current procedures, Poisson solvers, vector FFTs,
copy guard cell procedures, a particle push, and a particle sorting
procedure.  The final energy and timings are printed.  A sample output
file for the default input parameters is included in the file output.

In more detail, the inner loop of the code contains the following
procedures in Fortran (C):

Deposit section:
   PPGJPPOST32L (cppgjppost32l): deposit current density
   PPGPPOST32L (cppgppost32l): deposit charge density
   PPGDJPPOST32L (cppgdjppost32l): deposit acceleration density and
                                   momentum flux
   PPGDCJPPOST32L (cppgdcjppost32l): deposit electron current and
                                     acceleration density and momentum
                                     flux
   MPPASCFGUARD32L (cmppascfguard32l): add acceleration density and scaled
                                       transverse electric field
   PPAGUARD32XL (cppaguard32xl): add charge density guard cells in x on
                                 local processor
   PPNAGUARD32L (cppnaguard32l): add charge density guard cells in y and
                                 z from remote processor
   PPACGUARD32XL (cppacguard32xl): add current density guard cells in x
                                   on local processor
   PPNACGUARD32L (cppnacguard32l): add current density guard cells in y
                                   and z from remote processor
   PPACGUARD32XL (cppacguard32xl): add acceleration density guard cells in x
                                   on local processor
   PPNACGUARD32L (cppnacguard32l): add acceleration density guard cells in y
                                   and z from remote processor
   PPACGUARD32XL (cppacguard32xl): add momemtum flux guard cells in x
                                   on local processor
   PPNACGUARD32L (cppnacguard32l): add momemtum flux guard cells in y
                                   and z from remote processor

Field solve section:
   WPPFFT32RM (cwppfft32rm): FFT charge density to fourier space
   MPPOIS332 (cmppois332): calculate smoothed longitudinal electric
                           field in fourier space
   WPPFFT32RM3 (cwppfft32rm3): FFT smoothed longitudinal electric field
                               to real space
   WPPFFT32RM3 (cwppfft32rm3): FFT current density to fourier space
   MPPCUPERP32 (cmppcuperp32): take transverse part of current
   MPPBBPOISP332 (cmppbbpoisp332): calculate magnetic field in fourier
                                   space
   WPPFFT32RM3 (cwppfft32rm3): FFT smoothed magnetic field to real space
   MPPBADDEXT32 (cmppbaddext32): add constant to magnetic field
   WPPFFT32RM3 (cwppfft32rm3): FFT acceleration density to fourier space
   WPPFFT32RMN (cwppfft32rmn): FFT momentum flux to fourier space
   MPPADCUPERP32 (cmppadcuperp32): take transverse part of time
                                   derivative of current from momentum
                                   flux and acceleration density
   MPPEPOISP332(cmppepoisp332): calculate transverse electric field
   WPPFFT32RM3 (cwppfft32rm3): FFT smoothed transverse electric field to
                               real space

Particle Push section:
   PPNCGUARD32L (cppncguard32l): fill in guard cells for smoothed
                                 longitudinal electric field in y and z
                                 from remote processor
   PPCGUARD32XL (cppcguard32xl): fill in guard cells for smoothed
                                 longitudinal electric field in x field
                                 on local processor
   PPNCGUARD32L (cppncguard32l): fill in guard cells for smoothed
                                 magnetic field in y and z from remote
                                 processor
   PPCGUARD32XL (cppcguard32xl): fill in guard cells for smoothed
                                 magnetic field in x field on local
                                 processor
   PPNCGUARD32L (cppncguard32l): fill in guard cells for smoothed
                                 transverse electric field in y an z
                                 from remote processor
   PPCGUARD32XL (cppcguard32xl): fill in guard cells for smoothed
                                 transverse electric field in x on local
                                 processor
   MPPADDVRFIELD32 (cmppaddvrfield32): add longitudinal and transverse
                                       electric fields
   PPGBPPUSHF32L (cppgbppushf32l): update particle co-ordinates with
                                   smoothed electric and magnetic
                                   fields:
                                   x(t)->x(t+dt); v(t-dt/2)->v(t+dt/2)
   PPPORDERF32LA (cppporderf32la): copies outgoing particles to buffers
                                   from list supplied by PPGBPPUSHF23L.
   PPPMOVE32 (cpppmove32): moves particles to appropriate MPI node from
                           buffers supplied by PPPORDERF32LA.
   PPPORDER32LB (cppporder32lb): moves particles to appropriate tile.

The inputs to the code are the grid parameters indx, indy, indz, the
particle number parameters npx, npy, npz, the time parameters tend, dt,
the velocity parameters vtx, vty, vtz, vx0, vy0, vz0, the inverse speed
of light ci, magnetic field electron cyclotron frequencies omx, omy,
omz, and number of corrections in darwin iteration ndc.  In addition,
the tile size mx, my, mz, and overflow size xtras are defined.

In more detail:
indx = exponent which determines length in x direction, nx=2**indx.
indy = exponent which determines length in y direction, ny=2**indy.
indz = exponent which determines length in z direction, nz=2**indz.
   These ensure the system lengths are a power of 2.
npx = number of electrons distributed in x direction.
npy = number of electrons distributed in y direction.
npz = number of electrons distributed in z direction.
   The total number of particles in the simulation is npx*npy*npz.
tend = time at end of simulation, in units of plasma frequency.
dt = time interval between successive calculations.
   The number of time steps the code runs is given by tend/dt.
   typically, dt should be less than .2 for the Darwin code
vtx/vty/vtz = thermal velocity of electrons in x/y/z direction.
   a typical value is 1.0.
vx0/vy0/vz0 = drift velocity of electrons in x/y/z direction.
ci = reciprical of velocity of light
omx/omy/omz = magnetic field electron cyclotron frequency in x/y/z
ndc = number of corrections in darwin iteration
   typical values are 1 or 2.
mx/my/mz = number of grids points in x, y, and z in each tile
   should be less than or equal to 16.

The major program files contained here include:
mpdpic3.f90    Fortran90 main program 
mpdpic3.c      C main program
mpplib3.f      Fortran77 MPI communications library
mpplib3_h.f90  Fortran90 MPI communications interface (header) library
mpplib3.f90    Fortran90 MPI communications library
mpplib3.c      C MPI communications library [Not yet implemented]
mpplib3.h      C MPI communications header library
omplib.f       Fortran77 OpenMP utility library
omplib_h.f90   Fortran90 OpenMP utility interface (header) library
omplib.c       C OpenMP utility library
omplib.h       C OpenMP utility header library
mpdpush3.f     Fortran77 procedure library
mpdpush3_h.f90 Fortran90 procedure interface (header) library
mpdpush3.c     C procedure library [Not yet implemented]
mpdpush3.h     C procedure header library
dtimer.c       C timer function, used by both C and Fortran

Files with the suffix .f90 adhere to the Fortran 90 standard, files with
the suffix .f adhere to the Fortran77 standard, files with the suffix .c
and .h adhere to the C99 standard.

The makefile is setup to use gcc and gfortran with Linux.  A version for
Mac OS X is also in the Makefile, but is commented out.  

Two executables can be created, fmpdpic3 for Fortran, and cmpdpic3_f for
a C main program calling the Fortran procedure library.

To compile program, execute:

make program_name

where program_name is either: fmpdpic3 or cmpdpic3_f.

The command to execute a program with both MPI and OpenMP varies from
one system to another.  One possible command is:

mpiexec -np nproc -perhost n ./program_name

where program_name is either fmpdpic3 or cmpdpic3_f, and
where nproc is the number of processors to be used, and
where n is the number of MPI nodes per host.

There is one restriction on the number of processors which can be used:
this simple skeleton code does not support the case where MPI nodes have
zero grid points.  This special case can happen for certain combinations
of the grid size in y or z (set by the parameters indy or indz,
respectively) and the number of processors in y and z.  If this happens
the code will exit with an error message.  This special case will never
occur if the grid size in y is an exact multiple of the number of
processors in y, and the grid size in z is an exact multiple of the
number of processors in z.

By default, OpenMP will use the maximum number of processors it can find
on the MPI node.  If the user wants to control the number of threads, a
parameter nvpp can be set in the main program.  In addition, the
environment variable OMP_NUM_THREADS may need to be set to the maximum
number of threads per node expected.

The file output contains the results produced for the default parameters.
Typical timing results are shown in the file fmpdpic3_bench.pdf.

The Fortran version can be compiled to run with double precision by
changing the Makefile (typically by setting the compiler options flags
-r8).

The libraries mpplib3_f.c, omplib_f.c, and mpdpush3_f.c contain wrapper
functions to allow the Fortran libraries to be called from C.
