Skeleton 2-1/2D Electromagnetic MPI/OpenMP Particle-in-Cell (PIC) codes
by Viktor K. Decyk
copyright 2000-2013, regents of the university of california

This program contains sample codes for illustrating the basic structure
of a 2-1/2D Electromagnetic MPI/OpenMP Particle-in-Cell (PIC) code, in
both Fortran and C. The codes have no diagnosics except for initial and
final energies.  Their primary purpose is to provide example codes for
physical science students learning about MPI/OpenMP PIC codes.  They are
also intended as benchmark reference codes to aid in developing new
codes and in evaluating new computer architectures.  Parallel versions
of this code with the same structure for MPI only (pbpic2) and OpenMP
only (mbpic2) also exist, and can be compared to this code in order to
understand the parallel algorithms.

PIC codes are widely used in plasma physics.  They model plasmas as
particles which interact self-consistently via the electromagnetic
fields they themselves produce.  PIC codes generally have three
important procedures in the main iteration loop.  The first is the
deposit, where some particle quantity, such as a charge, is accumulated
on a grid via interpolation to produce a source density.  The second
important procedure is the field solver, which solves Maxwell’s equation
or a subset to obtain the electric and/or magnetic fields from the
source densities.  Finally, once the fields are obtained, the particle
forces are found by interpolation from the grid, and the particle
co-ordinates are updated, using Newton’s second law and the Lorentz
force.  The particle processing parts dominate over the field solving
parts in a typical PIC application. 

More details about PIC codes can be found in the texts by C. K. Birdsall
and A. B. Langdon, Plasma Physics via Computer Simulation, 1985,
R. W. Hockney and J. W. Eastwood, Computer Simulation Using Particles,
1981, and John M. Dawson, "Particle simulation of plasmas", Rev. Mod.
Phys. 55, 403 (1983).  Details about the mathematical equations and
units used in this code is given in the companion article,
"Description of Electromagnetic Spectral Code from the UPIC Framework"
by Viktor K. Decyk, UCLA, in the file EMModels.pdf.

Details abut MPI can be found in the book by William Gropp, Ewing Lusk,
and Anthony Skjellum, Using MPI: Portable Parallel Programming with the
Message-Passing Interface, The MIT Press, 1994.  Details abut OpenMP can
be found in the book by Rohit Chandra, Leonardo Dagum, Dave Kohr, 
Dror Maydan, Jeff McDonald, and Ramesh Menon, Parallel Programming in
OpenMP, Morgan Kaufmann, 2001.

No warranty for proper operation of this software is given or implied.
Software or information may be copied, distributed, and used at own
risk; it may not be distributed without this notice included verbatim
with each file.  If use of these codes results in a publication, an
acknowledgement is requested.

The code here uses the complete electromagnetic interaction, obtained by
solving Maxwell's equation.  A spectral method using Fast Fourier
Transforms (FFTs) is used to solve the Maxwell and Poisson equations.  A
real to complex FFT is used, and the data in Fourier space is stored in
a packed format, where the input and output sizes are the same.  The
boundary conditions are periodic, only electron species are included,
and linear interpolation is used.

For parallelization, the code uses two levels of parallelism.  The
outermost level uses a simple domain decomposition scheme, where the
field quantities (electric and magnetic fields, charge and current
density) are divided among the computational nodes.  The primary
decomposition divides the y values evenly, that is, each MPI node has
all the x values for some y.  The particles are distributed so that the
y co-ordinates of the particles have a value within the domain.  This
simple decomposition works if the particles are uniformly distributed in
space.  Particles at the edge of the domain may need information from
the next domain in order to interpolate the fields.  To avoid
unnecessary communication, one extra guard cell in y is added at the end
of each domain that replicates the first y value in the next domain.
After particles are updated, some particles may move to a neighboring
domain.  A particle manager (PPPMOVE2) is responsible for moving such
particles to the appropriate domain.  The FFT is performed in 3 steps.
In going from real space to Fourier space, the FFT is first performed in
x for the y values in the primary domain.  The data is then transposed
to a secondary domain decomposition, where each node has all the y
values for some x.  The FFT is then performed in the y direction for the
x values in the secondary domain.  Maxwell and Poisson equations are
solved using this secondary decomposition.  There are five main
communication procedures which use MPI.  The first two add the guard
cells for the charge and current densities, the third copies the guard
cells for the electric and magnetic fields.  The fourth is the particle
manager, and the fifth transposes the data between primary and secondary
decompositions using an all to all communication pattern.  Further
information about the domain decomposition parallel algorithms used can
be found in the companion presentation Dcomp.pdf and in the article:
p. c. liewer and v. k. decyk, j. computational phys. 85, 302 (1989).

On each MPI node, a second level of parallelism is used.  The innermost
level uses a tiling (or blocking) technique.  Space is divided into
small 2D tiles (with typically 16x16 grid points in a tile), and
particles are organized so that their co-ordinates in x and y lie within
the same tile and are stored together in memory.  Assigning different
threads to different tiles avoids data collisions (where 2 threads try
to write to the same memory location at the same time).  The size of the
tiles should be smaller than the L1 cache and the number of tiles should
be equal to or greater than the number of processing cores.  There are 4
major procedures which make use of the tiled data structure, the charge
and current deposits, the particle push, and the particle reordering.
In the deposit procedures, each thread first deposits to a small local
density array the size of a tile plus guard cells.  After all the
particles in a tile have been processed the small density array is added
to the global density arrays.  The particle push is similar, where each
thread first copies the global field arrays to small local field arrays
which are then used for field interpolation.  The particle reordering
step is divided into two procedures.  The first procedure (PPORDERF2LA)
moves particles which are leaving a tile into an ordered particle
buffer.  In addition, those particles which are leaving the MPI node are
copied to an MPI send buffer.  The MPI particle manager (PPPMOVE2) then
sends and receives the particle buffer.  The second procedure
(PPORDERF2LB) then copies the incoming particles, either from the
ordered particle buffer or from the MPI receive buffer, and inserts the
particles into the appropriate location in the particle array.  Further
information about this tiling parallel algorithm used can be found in
the article: V. K. Decyk and T. V. Singh, "Particle-in-Cell Algorithms
for Emerging Computer Architectures," Computer Physics Communications,
185, 708, 2014, available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2013.10.013
Further information about the hybrid domain decomposition/tiling scheme
can be found in the companion presentation MPI-OpenMP-PIC.pdf.

The default particle push and current deposit procedures calculate the
list of particles leaving the tiles.  This was done because the code was
faster.  There are, however, versions of the push
(PPGBPPUSH23L,PPGRBPPUSH23L) and current deposit
(PPGJPPOST2L,PPGRJPPOST2L) procedures which do not calculate the list,
and are easier to understand.  These versions of the push and deposit
require a different reordering procedure (PPPORDER2LA) which calculates
the list.

Important differences between the relativistic push and deposit
procedures (in mpbpush2.f and mpbpush2.c) and the OpenMP versions (in
mbpush2.f and mbpush2.c in the mbpic2 directory) are highlighted in the
files dmpbpush2_f.pdf and dmpbpush2_c.pdf, respectively.

Differences between the main codes (mpbpic2.f90 and mpbpic2.c) and the
main codes in the MPI versions in the pbpic2 directory (pbpic2.f90 and
pbpic2.c) are highlighted in the files dmpbpic2_f90.pdf and
dmpbpic2_c.pdf, respectively.

Particles are initialized with a uniform distribution in space and a
gaussian distribution in velocity space.  This describes a plasma in
thermal equilibrium.  The inner loop contains a current and charge
deposit, add guard cell procedures, a vector and scalar FFT, a
transverse current procedure, Maxwell and Poisson solvers, vector FFTs,
copy guard cell procedures, a particle push, and a particle sorting
procedure.  The final energy and timings are printed.  A sample output
file for the default input parameters is included in the file output.

In more detail, the inner loop of the code contains the following
procedures in Fortran (C):

Deposit section:
   PPGRJPPOSTF2L (cppgrjppostf2l): relativistic current deposit, and
                                   update position: x(t+dt/2)->x(t+dt)
   PPGJPPOSTF2L (cppgjppostf2l): deposit current density, and update
                                 position: x(t+dt/2)->x(t+dt)                       
   PPORDERF2LA (cpporderf2la): copies outgoing particles to buffers from
                               list supplied by PPGRJPPOSTF2L or
                               PPGJPPOSTF2L.
   PPPMOVE2 (cpppmove2): moves particles to appropriate MPI node from
                         buffers supplied by PPORDERF2LA.
   PPORDERF2LB (cpporderf2lb): moves particles to appropriate tile.
   PPGPPOST2L (cppgppost2l): deposit charge density
   PPACGUARD2X (cppacguard2xl): add charge density guard cells in x on
                                local processor
   PPNACGUARD2L (cppnacguard2l): add charge density guard cells in y
                                 from remote processor
   PPAGUARD2XL (cppaguard2xl): add charge density guard cells in x on
                               local processor
   PPNAGUARD2L (cppnaguard2l): add charge density guard cells in y from
                               remote processor 

Field solve section:
   WPPFFT2RM (cwppfft2r): FFT charge density to fourier space
   WPPFFT2RM3 (cwppfft2r3): FFT current density to fourier space
   MPPCUPERP2 (cmppcuperp2): take transverse part of current
   MIPPBPOISP23 (cmippbpoisp23): calculate initial magnetic field in
                               fourier space
   MPPMAXWEL2 (cmppmaxwel2): update transverse electromagnetic fields in
                           fourier space
   MPPPOIS23 (cmppois23): calculate smoothed longitudinal electric field
                        in fourier space
   MPPEMFIELD2 (cmppemfield2): add smoothed longitudinal and transverse
                             electric fields
   MPPEMFIELD2 (cmppemfield2): copy smoothed magnetic field
   WPPFFT2RM3 (cwppfft2r3): FFT smoothed electric field to real space
   WPPFFT2RM3 (cwppfft2r3): FFT smoothed magnetic field to real space

Particle Push section:
   PPNCGUARD2L (cppncguard2l): fill in guard cells for smoothed electric
                               field in y from remote processor
   PPCGUARD2XL (cppcguard2xl): fill in guard cells for smoothed electric
                               field in x field on local processor
   PPNCGUARD2L (cppncguard2l): fill in guard cells for smoothed magnetic
                               field in y from remote processor
   PPCGUARD2XL (cppcguard2xl): fill in guard cells for smoothed magnetic
                               field in x field on local processor
   PPGRBPPUSHF23L (cppgrbppushf23l): update relativistic particle
                                     co-ordinates with smoothed electric
                                     and magnetic fields:
                                     x(t)->x(t+dt/2);
                                     v(t-dt/2)->v(t+dt/2)
   PPGBPPUSHF23L (cppgbppushf23l): update particle co-ordinates with
                                   smoothed electric and magnetic
                                   fields:
                                   x(t)->x(t+dt/2); v(t-dt/2)->v(t+dt/2)
   PPORDERF2LA (cpporderf2la): copies outgoing particles to buffers from
                               list supplied by PPGRBPPUSHF23L or
                               PPGBPPUSHF23L.
   PPPMOVE2 (cpppmove2): moves particles to appropriate MPI node from
                         buffers supplied by PPORDERF2LA.
   PPORDERF2LB (cpporderf2lb): moves particles to appropriate tile.


The inputs to the code are the grid parameters indx, indy, the particle
number parameters npx, npy, the time parameters tend, dt, and the
velocity paramters vtx, vty, vtz, vx0, vy0, vz0, the inverse speed of
light ci, the flag relativity.  In addition, a tile size mx, my, and
overflow size xtras are defined.

In more detail:
indx = exponent which determines length in x direction, nx=2**indx.
indy = exponent which determines length in y direction, ny=2**indy.
   These ensure the system lengths are a power of 2.
npx = number of electrons distributed in x direction.
npy = number of electrons distributed in y direction.
   The total number of particles in the simulation is npx*npy.
tend = time at end of simulation, in units of plasma frequency.
dt = time interval between successive calculations.
   The number of time steps the code runs is given by tend/dt.
   dt should be less than .45*ci for the electromagnetic code.
vtx/vty/vtz = thermal velocity of electrons in x/y/z direction.
   a typical value is 1.0.
vx0/vy0/vz0 = drift velocity of electrons in x/y/z direction.
ci = reciprical of velocity of light
relativity = (no,yes) = (0,1) = relativity is used
mx/my = number of grids points in x and y in each tile
   should be less than or equal to 32.

The major program files contained here include:
mpbpic2.f90     Fortran90 main program 
mpbpic2.c       C main program
mpplib2.f       Fortran77 MPI communications library
mpplib2_h.f90   Fortran90 MPI communications interface (header) library
mpplib2.f90     Fortran90 MPI communications library
mpplib2.c       C MPI communications library
mpplib2.h       C MPI communications header library
mpbpush2.f      Fortran77 procedure library
mpbpush2_h.f90  Fortran90 procedure interface (header) library
mpbpush2.c      C procedure library
mpbpush2.h      C procedure header library
dtimer.c        C timer function, used by both C and Fortran

Files with the suffix .f90 adhere to the Fortran 90 standard, files with
the suffix .f adhere to the Fortran77 standard, files with the suffix .c
and .h adhere to the C99 standard.

The makefile is setup to use gcc and gfortran with Linux.  A version for
Mac OS X is also in the Makefile, but is commented out.  

Two executables can be created, fmpbpic2 for Fortran, and cmpbpic2 for
C.

To compile the programs, execute:

Make program_name

where program_name is either: fmpbpic2 or cmpbpic2, or execute:

make

to create both programs.

The command to execute a program with both MPI and OpenMP varies from
one system to another.  One possible command is:

mpirun -np nproc ./program_name

where program_name is either fmbppic2 or cmpbpic2, and
where nproc is the number of processors to be used, and
where n is the number of MPI nodes per host.

There is one restriction on the number of processors which can be used:
this simple skeleton code does not support the case where MPI nodes have
zero grid points.  This special case can happen for certain combinations
of the grid size in y (set by the parameter indy) and the number of
processors chosen.  If this happens the code will exit with an error
message.  This special case will never occur if the grid size in y is an
exact multiple of the number of processors.

By default, OpenMP will use the maximum number of processors it can find
on the MPI node.  If the user wants to control the number of threads, a
parameter nvpp can be set in the main program.  In addition, the
environment variable OMP_NUM_THREADS may need to be set to the maximum
number of threads per node expected.

The file output contains the results produced for the default parameters.
Typical timing results are shown in the file fmpbpic2_bench.pdf.

The Fortran version can be compiled to run with double precision by
changing the Makefile (typically by setting the compiler options flags
-r8).

The libraries mpplib2.c, omplib.c, and mpbpush2.c contain wrapper
functions to allow the C libraries to be called from Fortran.  The
libraries mpplib2_f.c, omplib_f.c, and mpbpush2_f.c contain wrapper
functions to allow the Fortran libraries to be called from C.
