GPU Tuturial
by Viktor K. Decyk, UCLA

No warranty for proper operation of this software is given or implied.
software or information may be copied, distributed, and used at own
risk; it may not be distributed without this notice included verbatim
with each file.

This file contains three extended example codes for illustrating how to
program the NVIDIA GPU using Cuda, with both C and Fortran2003 main
programs.  There is a simple serial version as well as a parallel Cuda
version for each example.  All the Cuda C examples, as well as some
utility functions, are in the file gpulib2.cu (with header gpulib2.h).
This file also contains interfaces to Fortran77.  Interfaces to these
functions for Fortran2003 are in the file gpulib2_c.f90 (which creates
the module gpulib2_c).  There is also a Unix timer function in the file
dtimer.c, which contains a Fortran77 interface.

For example one, the files copy.f90 and copy.c (with header copy.h)
contain the serial vector copy examples in Fortran90 and C,
respectively.  The files fcexample1.f03 and example1.c contain the
corresponding main programs.  For example two, the files transpose.f90
and transpose.c (with header transpose.h) contain the serial transpose
examples in Fortran90 and C, respectively.  The files fcexample2.f03 and
example2.c contain the corresponding main programs.  For example
three, the files redux.f90 and redux.c (with header redux.h) contain the
serial sum reduction examples in Fortran90 and C, respectively.  The
files fcexample3.f03 and example3.c contain the corresponding main
programs.

In addition to the Cuda examples, we also have Cuda Fortran examples.
PGI Cuda Fortran is a commercial product of the Portland Group.  All the
Cuda Fortran examples, as well as some utility functions, are in the
file gpuflib2.cuf (which creates the module gpuflib2).  The Cuda Fortran
main programs for the three examples are in the files example1.f90,
example2.f90, and example3.f90.

To compile the Cuda C programs, including the Fortran main programs
which interface to cuda C, execute the command:

make

This command creates the following executables: cexample1, fcexample1,
cexample2, fcexample2, cexample3, and fcexample3.  For these examples,
the Makefile is set up to use the gcc and gfortran compilers, as well as
the Cuda compiler nvcc.  The nvcc compiler compiles for GPUs with
compute capability 2.0.  However, only one kernel, gsum1, actually
requires this capability.  If this kernel and references to it are
removed, then the remaining examples can be compiled for compute
capability 1.1 by setting the flag as follows:
NVOPTS = -O3 -arch sm_11
The compile just the Cuda C examples, execute the command:

make cuda

The compile just the Fortran examples which use Cuda C, execute:

make fccuda

The Makefile is currently set up for Linux.  A version for Mac OS X is
also in the Makefile, but is commented out.

To compile the PGI Cuda Fortran programs, execute the command:

make cudaf

This command creates the following executables: fexample1, fexample2,
and fexample3.  For these examples, the Makefile is set up to use the
gcc and pgf90 compilers. The PGI compiler compiles for GPUs with compute
capability 2.0.  However, only one kernel, gsum1, actually requires this
capability.  If this kernel and references to it are removed, then the
remaining examples can be compiled for compute capability 1.1 by setting
the flag as follows:
FNVOPTS = -O3 -ta=nvidia:cc11
To compile both Cuda C and PGI Cuda Fortran examples, it is recommended
that one execute the command

make clean

between compiling each set of examples, which removes the modules, but
not the main programs.

To execute the programs, type the name of the executable:

./program_name

where program_name is one of: cexample1, fcexample1, fexample1,
cexample2, fcexample2, fexample2, cexample3, fcexample3 or fexample3.
