Skeleton 2D Electrostatic Python OpenMP Particle-in-Cell (PIC) codes
by Viktor K. Decyk, Adam Tableman, and Qiyang Hu
copyright 2015, regents of the university of california

This file contains 2D Electrostatic Python OpenMP PIC codes.  They are
based on the 2D Electrostatic OpenMP PIC codes contained in the
directory mpic2.  The primary purpose is to illustrate how to replace a
Fortran or C main code with a Python script, in order allow the program
to be run interactively.

Python version 2.7 is recommended, and is available from the web site:
www.python.org.  Numpy (http://www.numpy.org) and SciPy
(http://www.scipy.org) also need to be installed.

The file fmpic2.py is a line by line translation of mpic2.f90 in the
directory mpic2, and cmpic2.py is a translation of mpic2.c.  The
procedure libraries mpush2.f and mpush2.c are identical to those in
mpic2.  Interface functions mpush2_hpy.f90 and cmpush2_hpy.f90 are
provided to allow the f2py program to automatically wrap the procedures
to make them accessible to Python.  The file mpush2_hpy.f90 has been
modified from mpush2_h.f90 in mpic2 in two ways.  The first modification
was the removal of the module/end module statements, which fp2y cannot
currently handle properly.  The second was the replacement of
explicit-shape array declarations with assumed-size array declarations
so that f2py would not remove the arguments in the array declarations
from the argument list.  The file cmpush2_hpy.f90 is the same as
mpush2_hpy.f90, except that the function names have been changed to the
C versions.  This works because the file mbpush2.c already contained
wrappers for Fortran.

No warranty for proper operation of this software is given or implied.
Software or information may be copied, distributed, and used at own
risk; it may not be distributed without this notice included verbatim
with each file.  If use of these codes results in a publication, an
acknowledgement is requested.

The major program files contained here include:
fmpic2.py       Python main script for Fortran procedure library
cmpic2.py       Python main script for C procedure library
mpush2.f        Fortran77 procedure library
mpush2_hpy.f90  Fortran procedure interface (header) library
mpush2.c        C procedure library
mpush2.h        C procedure header library
cmpush2_hpy.f90 C procedure interface (header) library
dtimer.c        C timer function, used by both C and Fortran
dtimer_hpy.f90  C timer interface (header) library
omplib.f        Fortran77 OpenMP utility library
omplib_hpy.f90  Fortran90 OpenMP utility interface (header) library

Files with the suffix .f90 adhere to the Fortran 90 standard, files with
the suffix .f adhere to the Fortran77 standard, files with the suffix .c
and .h adhere to the C99 standard.

The makefile is setup to use gcc and gfortran with Linux.  Versions for
other compitlers are also in the Makefile but are commented out.

Two dynamic libraries can be created, fmpush2.so for Fortran and
cmpush2.so for C.  To create them, execute:

Make program_name

where program_name is either: fmpic2.py or cmpic2.py, or execute:

make

to create both libraries.

To execute, type the name of the executable:

python program_name

where program_name is either fmpic2.py or cmpic2.py.

The file output contains the results produced for the default parameters.

