Skeleton 1-2/2D Electromagnetic OpenMP Particle-in-Cell (PIC) codes
by Viktor K. Decyk
copyright 2015, regents of the university of california

This program contains sample codes for illustrating the basic structure
of a 1-2/2D Electromagnetic OpenMP Particle-in-Cell (PIC) code, in both
Fortran and C. The codes have no diagnosics except for initial and final
energies.  Their primary purpose is to provide example codes for
physical science students learning about OpenMP PIC codes.  They are
also intended as benchmark reference codes to aid in developing new
codes and in evaluating new computer architectures.  A serial version of
this code with the same structure (bpic1) also exists, and can be
compared to this code in order to understand the parallel algorithms.

PIC codes are widely used in plasma physics.  They model plasmas as
particles which interact self-consistently via the electromagnetic
fields they themselves produce.  PIC codes generally have three
important procedures in the main iteration loop.  The first is the
deposit, where some particle quantity, such as a charge, is accumulated
on a grid via interpolation to produce a source density.  The second
important procedure is the field solver, which solves Maxwell’s equation
or a subset to obtain the electric and/or magnetic fields from the
source densities.  Finally, once the fields are obtained, the particle
forces are found by interpolation from the grid, and the particle
co-ordinates are updated, using Newton’s second law and the Lorentz
force.  The particle processing parts dominate over the field solving
parts in a typical PIC application.

More details about PIC codes can be found in the texts by C. K. Birdsall
and A. B. Langdon, Plasma Physics via Computer Simulation, 1985,
R. W. Hockney and J. W. Eastwood, Computer Simulation Using Particles,
1981, and John M. Dawson, "Particle simulation of plasmas", Rev. Mod.
Phys. 55, 403 (1983).  Details about the mathematical equations and
units used in this code is given in the companion article,
"Description of Electromagnetic Spectral Code from the UPIC Framework"
by Viktor K. Decyk, UCLA, in the file EMModels.pdf.

Details abut OpenMP can be found in the book by Rohit Chandra, Leonardo
Dagum, Dave Kohr, Dror Maydan, Jeff McDonald, and Ramesh Menon, Parallel
Programming in OpenMP, Morgan Kaufmann, 2001.

No warranty for proper operation of this software is given or implied.
Software or information may be copied, distributed, and used at own
risk; it may not be distributed without this notice included verbatim
with each file.  If use of these codes results in a publication, an
acknowledgement is requested.

The code here uses the complete electromagnetic interaction, obtained by
solving Maxwell's equation.  A spectral method using Fast Fourier
Transforms (FFTs) is used to solve the Maxwell and Poisson equations.  A
real to complex FFT is used, and the data in Fourier space is stored in
a packed format, where the input and output sizes are the same.  The
boundary conditions are periodic, only electron species are included,
and linear interpolation is used.

For parallelization, the code uses a tiling (or blocking) technique.
Space is divided into small 1D tiles (with typically 32 grid points in a
tile), and particles are organized so that their co-ordinates in x lie
within the same tile and are stored together in memory.  Assigning
different threads to different tiles avoids data collisions (where 2
threads try to write to the same memory location at the same time).  The
size of the tiles should be smaller than the L1 cache and the number of
tiles should be equal to or greater than the number of processing cores.
There are 4 major procedures which make use of the tiled data structure,
the charge and current deposits, the particle push, and the particle
reordering.  In the deposit procedures, each thread first deposits to a
small local density array the size of a tile plus guard cells.  After
all the particles in a tile have been processed the small density array
is added to the global density arrays.  The particle push is similar,
where each thread first copies the global field arrays to small local
field arrays which are then used for field interpolation.  The particle
reordering procedure (PPORDERF1L) moves particles which are leaving one
tile into the appropriate location in another tile.  This is done by
first copying outgoing particles into an ordered particle buffer.  Then
particles are copied from the buffer into the new locations in the
particle array.  Performing this in two steps allows one to avoid data
collisions when running in parallel.  Further information about this
tiling parallel algorithm used can be found in the companion
presentation OpenMP-PIC.pdf and in the article:
V. K. Decyk and T. V. Singh, "Particle-in-Cell Algorithms for Emerging
Computer Architectures," Computer Physics Communications, 185, 708,
2014, available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2013.10.013.

The default particle push and current deposit procedures calculate the
list of particles leaving the tiles.  This was done because the code was
faster.  There are, however, versions of the push
(GBPPUSH1L,GRBPPUSH1L) and current deposit (GJPPOST1L,GRJPPOST1L)
procedures which do not calculate the list, and are easier to
understand.  These versions of the push and deposit require a different
reordering procedure (PPORDER1L) which calculates the list.

Particles are initialized with a uniform distribution in space and a
gaussian distribution in velocity space.  This describes a plasma in
thermal equilibrium.  The inner loop contains a current and charge
deposit, add guard cell procedures, a vector and scalar FFT, a
transverse current procedure, Maxwell and Poisson solvers, vector FFTs,
copy guard cell procedures, a particle push, and a particle reordering
procedure.  The final energy and timings are printed.  A sample output
file for the default input parameters is included in the file output.

In more detail, the inner loop of the code contains the following
procedures in Fortran (C):

Deposit section:
   GRJPPOSTF1L (cgrjppostf1l): relativistic current deposit, and update
                               position. also calculate locations of
                               particles leaving tile for PPORDERF1L.
                               x(t+dt/2)->x(t+dt)
   GJPPOSTF1L (cgjppostf1l): deposit current density, and update
                             position. also calculate locations of
                             particles leaving tile for PPORDERF1L.
                             x(t+dt/2)->x(t+dt)
   PPORDERF1L (cpporderf1l) : move particles to appropriate tile from
                              list supplied by GRJPPOSTF1L or GJPPOSTF1L
   GPPOST1L (cgppost1l): deposit charge density
   ACGUARD1L (cacguard1l): add current density guard cells
   AGUARD1L (caguard1l): add charge density guard cells

Field solve section:
   FFT1RXX (cfft1rxx): FFT charge density to fourier space
   FFT1R2X (cfft1r2x): FFT current density to fourier space
   IBPOIS13 (cibpois13): calculate initial magnetic field in fourier
                         space
   MAXWEL1 (cmaxwel1): update transverse electromagnetic fields in
                       fourier space
   POIS1 (cpois1): calculate smoothed longitudinal electric field in
                       fourier space.
   EMFIELD1 (cemfield1): add smoothed longitudinal and transverse
                         electric fields
   BMFIELD1 (cbmfield1): copy smoothed magnetic field
   FFT1R3X (cfft1r3x): FFT smoothed electric field to real space
   FFT1R2X (cfft1r2x)): FFT smoothed magnetic field to real space

Particle Push section:
   BGUARD1L (cbguard1l): fill in guard cells for smoothed electric field
   CGUARD2L (ccguard1l): fill in guard cells for smoothed magnetic field
   GRBPPUSHF1L (cgrbppushf1l): update relativistic particle
                               co-ordinates with smoothed electric and
                               magnetic fields. also calculates
                               locations of particles leaving tile for
                               PPORDERF1L.
                               x(t)->x(t+dt/2); v(t-dt/2)->v(t+dt/2)
   GBPPUSHF1L (cgbppushf1l): update particle co-ordinates with
                             smoothed electric and magnetic fields.
                             also calculates locations of particles
                             leaving tile for PPORDERF1L.
                             x(t)->x(t+dt/2); v(t-dt/2)->v(t+dt/2)
   PPORDERF1L (cpporderf1l) : move particles to appropriate tile from
                              list supplied by GRBPPUSHF1L or
                              GBPPUSHF1L

The inputs to the code are the grid parameter indx, the particle number
parameter npx, the time parameters tend, dt, the velocity paramters vtx,
vty, vtz, vx0, vy0, vz0, the inverse speed of light ci, the flag
relativity.  In addition, a tile size mx and overflow size xtras are
defined.

In more detail:
indx = exponent which determines length in x direction, nx=2**indx.
   These ensure the system lengths are a power of 2.
npx = number of electrons distributed in x direction.
   The total number of particles in the simulation is npx
tend = time at end of simulation, in units of plasma frequency.
dt = time interval between successive calculations.
   The number of time steps the code runs is given by tend/dt.
   dt should be less than .64*ci for the electromagnetic code.
vtx/vty/vtz = thermal velocity of electrons in x/y/z direction.
   a typical value is 1.0.
vx0/vy0/vz0 = drift velocity of electrons in x/y/z direction.
ci = reciprocal of velocity of light
relativity = (no,yes) = (0,1) = relativity is used
mx = number of grids points in x in each tile
   should be less than or equal to 128.
xtras = fraction of extra particles needed for particle management

The major program files contained here include:
mbpic1.f90    Fortran90 main program 
mbpic1.c      C main program
omplib.f      Fortran77 OpenMP utility library
omplib_h.f90  Fortran90 OpenMP utility interface (header) library
omplib.c      C OpenMP utility library
omplib.h      C OpenMP utility header library
mbpush1.f     Fortran77 procedure library
mbpush1_h.f90 Fortran90 procedure interface (header) library
mbpush1.c     C procedure library [Not yet implemented]
mbpush1.h     C procedure header library
dtimer.c      C timer function, used by both C and Fortran

Files with the suffix .f90 adhere to the Fortran 90 standard, files with
the suffix .f adhere to the Fortran77 standard, files with the suffix .c
and .h adhere to the C99 standard.

The makefile is setup to use gcc and gfortran with Linux.  A version for
Mac OS X is also in the Makefile, but is commented out.  

Two executables can be created, fmbpic1 for Fortran, and cmbpic1_f for C

To compile program, execute:

Make program_name

where program_name is either: fmbpic1 or cmbpic1_f, or execute:

make

to create both programs.

To execute, type the name of the executable:

./program_name

where program_name is either fmbpic1 or cmbpic1_f.  By default, OpenMP
will use the maximum number of processors it can find.  If the user
wants to control the number of threads, you can set a parameter nvp in
the main program. In addition, the environment variable OMP_NUM_THREADS
may need to be set to the maximum number of threads expected.

The file output contains the results produced for the default parameters.

The Fortran version can be compiled to run with double precision by
changing the Makefile (typically by setting the compiler options flags
-r8).

The libraries omplib.c and mbpush1.c contain wrapper functions to allow
the C libraries to be called from Fortran.  The libraries omplib_f.c and
mbpush1_f.c contain wrapper functions to allow the Fortran libraries to
be called from C.
