Skeleton 3D Electrostatic OpenMP Particle-in-Cell (PIC) codes
by Viktor K. Decyk
copyright 2014, regents of the university of california

This program contains sample codes for illustrating the basic structure
of a 3D Electrostatic OpenMP Particle-in-Cell (PIC) code, in both
Fortran and C.  The codes have no diagnosics except for initial and
final energies.  Their primary purpose is to provide example codes for
physical science students learning about OpenMP PIC codes.  They are
also intended as benchmark reference codes to aid in developing new
codes and in evaluating new computer architectures.  A serial version of
this code with the same structure (pic3) also exists, and can be
compared to this code in order to understand the parallel algorithms.

PIC codes are widely used in plasma physics.  They model plasmas as
particles which interact self-consistently via the electromagnetic
fields they themselves produce.  PIC codes generally have three
important procedures in the main iteration loop.  The first is the
deposit, where some particle quantity, such as a charge, is accumulated
on a grid via interpolation to produce a source density.  The second
important procedure is the field solver, which solves Maxwell’s equation
or a subset to obtain the electric and/or magnetic fields from the
source densities.  Finally, once the fields are obtained, the particle
forces are found by interpolation from the grid, and the particle
co-ordinates are updated, using Newton’s second law and the Lorentz
force.  The particle processing parts dominate over the field solving
parts in a typical PIC application.

More details about PIC codes can be found in the texts by C. K. Birdsall
and A. B. Langdon, Plasma Physics via Computer Simulation, 1985,
R. W. Hockney and J. W. Eastwood, Computer Simulation Using Particles,
1981, and John M. Dawson, "Particle simulation of plasmas", Rev. Mod.
Phys. 55, 403 (1983).  Details about the mathematical equations and
units used in this code is given in the companion article,
"Description of Electrostatic Spectral Code from the UPIC Framework" by
Viktor K. Decyk, UCLA, in the file ESModels.pdf.

Details abut OpenMP can be found in the book by Rohit Chandra, Leonardo
Dagum, Dave Kohr, Dror Maydan, Jeff McDonald, and Ramesh Menon, Parallel
Programming in OpenMP, Morgan Kaufmann, 2001.

No warranty for proper operation of this software is given or implied.
Software or information may be copied, distributed, and used at own
risk; it may not be distributed without this notice included verbatim
with each file.  If use of these codes results in a publication, an
acknowledgement is requested.

The code here uses the simplest force, the electrostatic Coulomb
interaction, obtained by solving a Poisson equation.  A spectral method
using Fast Fourier Transforms (FFTs) is used to solve the Poisson
equation.  A real to complex FFT is used, and the data in Fourier space
is stored in a packed format, where the input and output sizes are the
same.  The boundary conditions are periodic, only electron species are
included, and linear interpolation is used.

For parallelization, the code uses a tiling (or blocking) technique.
Space is divided into small 3D tiles (with typically 8x8x8 grid points
in a tile), and particles are organized so that their co-ordinates in x,
y, and z lie within the same tile and are stored together in memory.
Assigning different threads to different tiles avoids data collisions
(where 2 threads try to write to the same memory location at the same
time).  The size of the tiles should be smaller than the L1 cache and
the number of tiles should be equal to or greater than the number of
processing cores.  There are 3 major procedures which make use of the
tiled data structure, the charge deposit, the particle push, and the
particle reordering.  In the deposit procedure, each thread first
deposits to a small local density array the size of a tile plus guard
cells.  After all the particles in a tile have been processed the small
density array is added to the global charge density array.  The particle
push is similar, where each thread first copies the global field array
to a small local field array which is then used for field interpolation.
The particle reordering procedure (PPORDERF3L) moves particles which are
leaving one tile into the appropriate location in another tile.  This is
done by first copying outgoing particles into an ordered particle buffer.
Then particles are copied from the buffer into the new locations in the
particle array.  Performing this in two steps allows one to avoid data
collisions when running in parallel.  Further information about this
tiling parallel algorithm used can be found in the companion
presentation OpenMP-PIC.pdf and in the article:  V. K. Decyk and
T. V. Singh, "Particle-in-Cell Algorithms for Emerging Computer
Architectures," Computer Physics Communications, 185, 708, 2014,
available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2013.10.013.

The default particle push calculates the list of particles leaving the
tiles.  This was done because the code was faster.  There is, however, a
version of the push (GPPUSH3L) which does not calculate the list, and is
easier to understand.  This version of the push requires a different
reordering procedure (PPORDER3L) which calculates the list.

Particles are initialized with a uniform distribution in space and a
gaussian distribution in velocity space.  This describes a plasma in
thermal equilibrium.  The inner loop contains a charge deposit, add
guard cell procedures, a scalar FFT, a Poisson solver, a vector FFT,
copy guard cell procedures, a particle push, and a particle reordering
procedure.  The final energy and timings are printed.  A sample output
file for the default input parameters is included in the file output.

In more detail, the inner loop of the code contains the following
procedures in Fortran (C):

Deposit section:
   GPPOST3L (cgppost3l): deposit charge density
   AGUARD3L (caguard3l): add charge density guard cells

Field solve section:
   WFFT3RMX (cwfft3rmx): FFT charge density to fourier space
   MPOIS33 (cmpois33): calculate smoothed longitudinal electric field
                       in fourier space.
   FFT3RM3 (cwfft3rm3): FFT smoothed electric field to real space

Particle Push section:
   CGUARD3L (ccguard3l): fill in guard cells for smoothed electric field
   GPPUSHF3L (cgppushf3l): update particle co-ordinates with smoothed
                           electric field. also calculate locations of
                           particles leaving tile for PPORDERF2L.
                           x(t)->x(t+dt); v(t-dt/2)->v(t+dt/2)
   PPORDERF3L (cpporderf3l): move particles to appropriate tile from
                             list supplied by GPPUSHF3L

The inputs to the code are the grid parameters indx, indy, indz, the
particle number parameters npx, npy, npz, the time parameters tend, dt,
and the velocity paramters vtx, vty, vtz, vx0, vy0, vz0.  In addition,
a tile size mx, my, mz, and overflow size xtras are defined.

In more detail:
indx = exponent which determines length in x direction, nx=2**indx.
indy = exponent which determines length in y direction, ny=2**indy.
indz = exponent which determines length in z direction, nz=2**indz.
   These ensure the system lengths are a power of 2.
npx = number of electrons distributed in x direction.
npy = number of electrons distributed in y direction.
npz = number of electrons distributed in z direction.
   The total number of particles in the simulation is npx*npy.
tend = time at end of simulation, in units of plasma frequency.
dt = time interval between successive calculations.
   The number of time steps the code runs is given by tend/dt.
   dt should be less than .2 for the electrostatic code.
vtx/vty/vtz = thermal velocity of electrons in x/y/z direction
   a typical value is 1.0.
vx0/vy0/vz0 = drift velocity of electrons in x/y/z direction.
mx/my/mz = number of grids points in x, y, and z in each tile
   should be less than or equal to 16.
xtras = fraction of extra particles needed for particle management

The major program files contained here include:
mpic3.f90    Fortran90 main program 
mpic3.c      C main program
omplib.f     Fortran77 OpenMP utility library
omplib_h.f90 Fortran90 OpenMP utility interface (header) library
omplib.c     C OpenMP utility library
omplib.h     C OpenMP utility header library
mpush3.f     Fortran77 procedure library
mpush3_h.f90 Fortran90 procedure interface (header) library
mpush3.c     C procedure library
mpush3.h     C procedure header library
dtimer.c     C timer function, used by both C and Fortran

Files with the suffix .f90 adhere to the Fortran 90 standard, files with
the suffix .f adhere to the Fortran77 standard, files with the suffix .c
and .h adhere to the C99 standard.

The makefile is setup to use gcc and gfortran with Linux.  A version for
Mac OS X is also in the Makefile, but is commented out.  

Two executables can be created, fmpic3 for Fortran, and cmpic3 for C.

To compile program, execute:

Make program_name

where program_name is either: fmpic3 or cmpic3, or execute:

make

to create both programs.

To execute, type the name of the executable:

./program_name

where program_name is either fmpic3 or cmpic3.  By default, OpenMP will
use the maximum number of processors it can find.  If the user wants to
control the number of threads, a parameter nvp can be set in the main
program.  In addition, the environment variable OMP_NUM_THREADS may need
to be set to the maximum number of threads expected.

The file output contains the results produced for the default parameters.

The Fortran version can be compiled to run with double precision by
changing the Makefile (typically by setting the compiler options flags
-r8).

The libraries omplib.c and mpush3.c contain wrapper functions to allow
the C libraries to be called from Fortran.  The libraries omplib_f.c and
mpush3_f.c contain wrapper functions to allow the Fortran libraries to
be called from C.

