Skeleton 1-2/2D Darwin Python Particle-in-Cell (PIC) code
by Viktor K. Decyk, Adam Tableman, and Qiyang Hu
copyright 2015, regents of the university of california

This file contains a 1-2/2D Darwin Python PIC code.  It is based on the
1-2/2D Darwin PIC code contained in the directory dpic1.  The primary
purpose is to illustrate how to replace a Fortran main code with a
Python script, in order allow the program to be run interactively.

Python version 2.7 is recommended, and is available from the web site:
www.python.org.  Numpy (http://www.numpy.org) and SciPy
(http://www.scipy.org) also need to be installed.

The file fdpic1.py is a line by line translation of dpic1.f90 in the
directory dpic1.  The procedure library dpush1.f is identical to that in
dpic1.  Interface function dpush1_hpy.f90 is provided to allow the f2py
program to automatically wrap the procedures to make them accessible to
Python.  The file dpush1_hpy.f90 has been modified from dpush1_h.f90 in
dpic1 in two ways.  The first modification was the removal of the
module/end module statements, which fp2y cannot currently handle
properly.  The second was the replacement of explicit-shape array
declarations with assumed-size array declarations so that f2py would not
remove the arguments in the array declarations from the argument list.

No warranty for proper operation of this software is given or implied.
Software or information may be copied, distributed, and used at own
risk; it may not be distributed without this notice included verbatim
with each file.  If use of these codes results in a publication, an
acknowledgement is requested.

The major program files contained here include:
fdpic1.py       Python main script for Fortran procedure library
dpush1.f        Fortran77 procedure library
dpush1_hpy.f90  Fortran procedure interface (header) library
dtimer.c       C timer function, used by both C and Fortran
dtimer_hpy.f90 C timer interface (header) library

Files with the suffix .f90 adhere to the Fortran 90 standard, files with
the suffix .f adhere to the Fortran77 standard, files with the suffix .c
and .h adhere to the C99 standard.

The makefile is setup to use gcc and gfortran with Linux.  Versions for
other compitlers are also in the Makefile but are commented out.

One dynamic library can be created, fdpush1.so for Fortran.  To create
it, execute:

make

To execute, type the name of the executable:

python fdpic1.py

The file output contains the results produced for the default parameters.
