Skeleton 3D Electromagnetic Particle-in-Cell (PIC) codes
by Viktor K. Decyk
copyright 1999-2013, regents of the university of california

This program contains sample codes for illustrating the basic structure
of a 3D Electromagnetic Particle-in-Cell (PIC) code, in both Fortran and
C.  The codes have no diagnosics except for initial and final energies.
Their primary purpose is to provide example codes for physical science
students learning about PIC codes.  They are also intended as benchmark
reference codes to aid in developing new codes and in evaluating new
computer architectures.

PIC codes are widely used in plasma physics.  They model plasmas as
particles which interact self-consistently via the electromagnetic
fields they themselves produce.  PIC codes generally have three
important procedures in the main iteration loop.  The first is the
deposit, where some particle quantity, such as a charge, is accumulated
on a grid via interpolation to produce a source density.  The second
important procedure is the field solver, which solves Maxwell’s equation
or a subset to obtain the electric and/or magnetic fields from the
source densities.  Finally, once the fields are obtained, the particle
forces are found by interpolation from the grid, and the particle
co-ordinates are updated, using Newton’s second law and the Lorentz
force.  The particle processing parts dominate over the field solving
parts in a typical PIC application. 

More details about PIC codes can be found in the texts by C. K. Birdsall
and A. B. Langdon, Plasma Physics via Computer Simulation, 1985,
R. W. Hockney and J. W. Eastwood, Computer Simulation Using Particles,
1981, and John M. Dawson, "Particle simulation of plasmas", Rev. Mod.
Phys. 55, 403 (1983).  Details about the mathematical equations and
units used in this code is given in the companion article,
"Description of Electromagnetic Spectral Code from the UPIC Framework"
by Viktor K. Decyk, UCLA, in the file EMModels.pdf.

No warranty for proper operation of this software is given or implied.
Software or information may be copied, distributed, and used at own
risk; it may not be distributed without this notice included verbatim
with each file.  If use of these codes results in a publication, an
acknowledgement is requested.

The code here uses the complete electromagnetic interaction, obtained by
solving Maxwell's equation.  A spectral method using Fast Fourier
Transforms (FFTs) is used to solve the Maxwell and Poisson equations.  A
real to complex FFT is used, and the data in Fourier space is stored in
a packed format, where the input and output sizes are the same.  The
boundary conditions are periodic, only electron species are included,
and linear interpolation is used.

Particles are initialized with a uniform distribution in space and a
gaussian distribution in velocity space.  This describes a plasma in
thermal equilibrium.  The inner loop contains a current and charge
deposit, add guard cell procedures, a vector and scalar FFT, a
transverse current procedure, Maxwell and Poisson solvers, vector FFTs,
copy guard cell procedures, a particle push, and a particle sorting
procedure.  The final energy and timings are printed.  A sample output
file for the default input parameters is included in the file output.

In more detail, the inner loop of the code contains the following
procedures in Fortran (C):

Deposit section:
   GRJPOST3L (cgrjpost3l): relativistic current deposit, and update
                           position: x(t+dt/2)->x(t+dt)
   GJPOST3L (cgjpost3l): deposit current density, and update position:
                         x(t+dt/2)->x(t+dt)
   GPOST3L (cgpost3l): deposit charge density
   ACGUARD3L (cacguard3l): add current density guard cells
   AGUARD3L (caguard3l): add charge density guard cells

Field solve section:
   WFFT3RX (cwfft3rx): FFT charge density to fourier space
   WFFT3R3 (cwfft3r3): FFT current density to fourier space
   CUPERP3 (ccuperp3): take transverse part of current
   IBPOIS33 (cibpois33): calculate initial magnetic field in fourier
                         space
   MAXWEL3 (cmaxwel3): update transverse electromagnetic fields in
                       fourier space
   POIS33 (cpois33): calculate smoothed longitudinal electric field in
                     fourier space.
   EMFIELD3 (cemfield3): add smoothed longitudinal and transverse
                         electric fields
   EMFIELD3 (cemfield3): copy smoothed magnetic field
   WFFT3R3 (cwfft3r3): FFT smoothed electric field to real space
   WFFT3R3 (cwfft3r3): FFT smoothed magnetic field to real space

Particle Push section:
   BGUARD3L (cbguard3l): fill in guard cells for smoothed electric field
   BGUARD3L (cbguard3l): fill in guard cells for smoothed magnetic field
   GRBPUSH3L (cgrbpush3l): update relativistic particle co-ordinates
                           with smoothed electric and magnetic fields:
                           x(t)->x(t+dt/2); v(t-dt/2)->v(t+dt/2)
   GBPUSH3Lcgbpush3l): update particle co-ordinates with smoothed
                       electric and magnetic fields:
                       x(t)->x(t+dt/2); v(t-dt/2)->v(t+dt/2)
   DSORTP3YZL (cdsortp3yzl) : sort particles by cell

The inputs to the code are the grid parameters indx, indy, indz, the
particle number parameters npx, npy, npz, the time parameters tend, dt,
and the velocity paramters vtx, vty, vtz, vx0, vy0, vz0, the inverse
speed of light ci, the flag relativity, and the sorting parameter
sortime.

In more detail:
indx = exponent which determines length in x direction, nx=2**indx.
indy = exponent which determines length in y direction, ny=2**indy.
indz = exponent which determines length in z direction, nz=2**indz.
   These ensure the system lengths are a power of 2.
npx = number of electrons distributed in x direction.
npy = number of electrons distributed in y direction.
npz = number of electrons distributed in z direction.
   The total number of particles in the simulation is npx*npy*npz.
tend = time at end of simulation, in units of plasma frequency.
dt = time interval between successive calculations.
   The number of time steps the code runs is given by tend/dt.
   dt should be less than .37*ci for the electromagnetic code.
vtx/vty/vtz = thermal velocity of electrons in x/y/z direction.
   a typical value is 1.0.
vx0/vy0/vz0 = drift velocity of electrons in x/y/z direction.
ci = reciprocal of velocity of light
relativity = (no,yes) = (0,1) = relativity is used
sortime = number of time steps between electron sorting.
   This is used to improve cache performance.  sortime=0 to suppress.

The major program files contained here include:
bpic3.f90    Fortran90 main program 
bpic3.c      C main program
bpush3.f     Fortran77 procedure library
bpush3_h.f90 Fortran90 procedure interface (header) library
bpush3.c     C procedure library
bpush3.h     C procedure header library
dtimer.c     C timer function, used by both C and Fortran

Files with the suffix .f90 adhere to the Fortran 90 standard, files with
the suffix .f adhere to the Fortran77 standard, files with the suffix .c
and .h adhere to the C99 standard.

The makefile is setup to use gcc and gfortran with Linux.  A version for
Mac OS X is also in the Makefile, but is commented out.  

Two executables can be created, fbpic3 for Fortran and cbpic3 for C.

To compile program, execute:

make program_name

where program_name is either: fbpic3 or cbpic3, or execute:

make

to create both programs.

To execute, type the name of the executable:

./program_name

where program_name is either fbpic3 or cbpic3.

The file output contains the results produced for the default parameters.

The Fortran version can be compiled to run with double precision by
changing the Makefile (typically by setting the compiler options flags
-r8).

The library bpush3.c contains wrapper functions to allow the C library
to be called from Fortran. The library bpush3_f.c contains wrapper
functions to allow the Fortran library to be called from C.
